there's a misleading illusion that the
vegan movement is growing because more
and more grocery stores have packaged
products on the store shelf packaged
products are not a powerful indicator of
interest or the political vitality
social relevance meaning and impetus of
the movement Paul Bashir is one of the
single most successful people in vegan
activism in the last five years but look
at his YouTube channel and he's not even
half as successful as I am and I define
myself not as a measure of success but
as a measure of failure so let's get
real here's the YouTube channel for the
save movement the save movement is
probably the most respected and the most
positively covered in the mainstream
press of all these examples they get you
know magazines and newspapers writing
about them look at the YouTube channel I
can get more views than that if I just
upload another video complaining that
young people are lazy and should quit
playing video games if anything what
this indicates to me is that the
statistic we started with from Google
corporation the trending data showing a
50% decrease from a peek into that early
2017 we're now at 50% the level of
interest that looks like a conservative
estimate there is a dynamic relationship
between the level of interest what
Google measures and these statistics and
then what you could do with organizing
that interest to go in and accomplish
things in terms of lobbying activism
events in the real world let me make my
bias clear within the first 5 seconds
this video I am myself vegan I am myself
an aspiring vegan activist I've been
coming here on YouTube for years to
sound the warning bell to sound the
alarm when something is going wrong in
the vegan movement because I want the
vegan movement in general to succeed I
want to succeed myself it's really easy
to take an attitude of shooting the
messenger the last time I made a video
talking with this phenomenon 100%
negative response but guess what there
are
statistics that backup my perspective on
this matter this is Google trend data
showing you that interest in veganism is
not growing now I'm going to come back
to this chart you're gonna see it zoomed
in up close we're gonna talk about this
in some detail so don't worry you don't
have to pause the video now you don't
have to rewind for those of you in the
audience who are inclined to disregard
this chart for those of you the audience
who are highly motivated to dismiss all
of this data because it's bad news you
don't want to hear because it's a canary
in a coal mine
whatever allegory one is keep in mind
keep in mind how you would respond to
this same chart this same data if it
were showing the exact opposite trend if
we're showing you this same chart from
the same source I could even take this
and just flip it backwards and I said to
you hey interest in veganism is going up
and up interest in veganism within two
years had doubled you wouldn't be so
skeptical would you you'd say oh well
that's great we have this solid evidence
social science research in the internet
showing us that interest in veganism is
going up and up that the vegan movement
is doing better and better okay
my formal education is in political
science very much including the use of
social science statistics the way we
learn about trends and public interest
approval and disapproval and political
issues in political science it's been a
big part of my life in the university
even in the professional sphere if it in
my private life
I got to say okay I understand these
things work the type of data you get
from Google corporation here okay
it really is valuable it really is much
more valuable than what we relied on in
say the 1970s like in the 1970s they
literally phone up a bunch of people at
around dinnertime and ask them how
racist are they okay locally on these
days the end of the poem we have a few
questions for you this is a polling said
senator then you ask them some questions
about faces they are okay do you think
that really
accurately reflects how racist people
are compared to the precision we have in
measuring their viewing habits on
YouTube if you really crunch the numbers
of YouTube you can tell how many people
in the American public are concerned
about illegal immigration from Mexico
how many are concerned about this issue
how many concern about that issue and
you can put them in proportion in one of
the keys okay
the type of person who's concerned about
illegal immigration from Mexico the
statistics show just by looking at
YouTube viewing habits those same people
are even more concerned about the trade
deal with China or maybe it shows
they're less concerned but you'll have
numbers with that kind of precision
old-fashioned political science polling
data was much weaker than this so it
urged you it's good to be skeptical but
if you really understand the numbers and
the type of data you're looking at here
it's really very powerful what we now
have to work with compared to what we
used to rely on and political science
data the type of social science data we
get from YouTube we get from Google
Corporation it's really powerful it's
really meaningful don't ignore it if it
were telling you the exact opposite if
it were telling you that the level of
interest in veganism were doubling and
not dropping in half you wouldn't ignore
it
so don't ignore it now when it's the
canary in the coal mine when it's the
warning you need to hear what is the
warning we all need to hear to get
organized get motivated and turn this
movement around compared to the peak in
early 2017 interest in veganism is now
about 50% of what it once was and if
that seems implausible to you if you're
skeptical
keep in mind you can't have a
best-selling book every year some years
veganism has a huge breakthrough on a
mainstream TV show like The Oprah
Winfrey Show Oprah Winfrey did the vegan
challenge with her and her entire staff
writes exposes millions of people to
this idea this diet the ecology the
ethics for the first time can't happen
every year it cannot happen every year
if growth
in the vegan movement is going to be
sustained by having a best-selling book
year after year fear then that growth is
not sustainable recognize that yes it's
good to be skeptical but it's not it's
not reasonable to look at a couple of
years we had a few hit books hit movies
you know famous recognizable faces on
mainstream television talking about
veganism and think oh it's just gonna
keep growing and growing like this
forever
okay not even Star Wars can sustain that
not even Batman can sustain that they
can't have a hit Star Wars movie every
year but even if you did the social
political and ethical impact would be
less and less with each new movie with
each new book that comes out and that's
even true of Star Wars okay the 1977
Star Wars film had a huge impact on the
culture and you know what I'm sure the
first time veganism got discussed in the
Oprah Winfrey Show huge impact on the
culture for millions of people the first
time they saw slaughterhouse footage the
first time they saw a documentary about
ecology and veganism or about the ethics
of animals treat huge impact okay but
now that is over it's a short term
effect on the culture this is the
YouTube channel of Paul Bashir and these
are really important to look at as
indications Paul Bashir is the
respectable face of anonymous for the
voiceless I personally am NOT a fan of
this organization but they are one of
the most famous the most influential the
most discussed in newspapers vegan
organizations in the world okay so in
the last three years this has been an
enormous ly successful organization and
it has partly been enormously successful
because of the dynamic link between
their Street activism and what they put
on YouTube okay so this is not an
example of a failure this is an example
of one of the most successful vegan
organizations of time look at the
numbers look at the numbers look at the
number of viewers on that channel it's
nothing
it's practically zero okay that is a
sign that is a canary in a coal mine
there's something wrong here what we
call success in vegan activism is
shockingly similar to failure you don't
believe me here's the total number of
views per month
Paul Bashir gets and you get a little
bit of a chart there showing you that
you know it's kind of normal a little
bit of a decline thirty-four thousand
there's the total number of views I get
I consider myself a failure I consider
my channel on YouTube a failure I
consider my attempts at vegan activism
thus far to be a complete failure and
yet I'm vastly more successful than Paul
Bashir on YouTube and Paul Bashir is the
only YouTube channel for anonymous of
the voiceless look on the right-hand
side of the screen there
they've reserved basically a blank
channel with the name anonymous to the
voiceless but the Paul Bashir channel is
the YouTube channel for that
organization okay what is success and
what is failure in this movement there's
a real warning here that we should not
disregard direct action everywhere okay
it's difficult to say who has had more
coverage in the mainstream media in the
last couple of years and on us for the
voiceless or direct action everywhere
okay they have both had a ton of
discussion on television radio
newspapers during this period of time
they've had an avalanche of mainstream
press coverage they've had controversy
conflict court cases and they have had a
lot of money look at the number of views
they have on YouTube all right many of
you will say oh well YouTube isn't real
life whether we're talking about Paul
Bashir anonymous with voiceless or
direct action ever
oh well YouTube doesn't really measure
the number of people involved really you
think so okay I put this on a small
scale notice in large scale this is a
really misleading misconception for two
reasons on a small scale think about how
many participants are involved in Paul
Bashir's videos think about how many
participants
are involved in direct action everywhere
videos people who were there people who
attended the event people said hey
that's me in that video and by the way
there you know these are kind of
professionally edited they're not like
my videos a lot more human hands a lot
more volunteers or participants are
involved and putting these videos
together you get a slick packaged
product with professional editing and
sometimes there were more than a hundred
people involved as participants in
making this video okay if you have a
hundred people involved with making a
video and they're all proud hey I was at
that protest I was at that event I was a
participant I'm in that video you know
you know what you have you have more
than 100 grandparents more than 100
boyfriends and girlfriend more than 100
and aunts and uncles whom you share that
video with or who find that video who
see that say oh that's four oh there's
my there's my cousin Andrew when he's in
that video there's my friend from high
school Sarah and she's in that video
with your attention for the fact that
these have so many participants and so
few viewers shows a crippling lack of
interest
you mean the low level of public
interest its significance is exacerbated
it's made worse when you consider how
many people are positively participating
how many people are involved has to be
seen that context that's on the small
scale on the large scale if you want to
disregard this how do you think how do
you think today the record industry
works when they're looking for a new
rapper for a new vocalist a new
recording artist you think they don't
look at how what numbers they do on
YouTube YouTube has some of the most
solid numbers in the game numbers on
Twitter can be very misleading numbers
on Facebook can be misleading these are
hard numbers on YouTube they really are
and they're directly connected to
advertising revenue and everything else
you think a record executive isn't going
to take the time to look and say oh well
you know this person claims that they've
been they've been playing sold-out shows
like let's say you have a recording
artist and say hey in the last six
months I did ten gigs and every single
one of those gigs had more than a
thousand people at them okay that's what
you say but you know what I think I
think looking at your numbers on YouTube
I think the people who were attending
those gigs the people who are attending
your concerts they were there to see
some
they're artists they were there for some
other reason they were just there
because it was Thursday night is
half-price beer at that venue those are
successful venues or successful shows
due to other artists because when I look
at your YouTube numbers then I know how
many people are really interested in you
how many people are interested in
hearing your voice right if you got
thousands of people showing up to events
whether their concerts lectures protests
and then you have practically zero views
on YouTube all right it's a very
important very meaningful indicator it's
much more powerful indicator than
old-fashioned polling data we used to
use in political science calling people
up on the phone is your fiends repping
them in the middle of their meal at
dinner and trying to ask them a bunch of
political questions they don't want
answer what this measures whether it's
the trend data from Google Corporation
or the views on YouTube it measures
interest an interest is the oxygen in
this ecosystem if there's no interest
how are you gonna get organized to do
activism if there's no interest how are
you gonna earn people's trust to give
you donations to go out and start the
products projects you want to do okay
there's a misleading illusion that the
vegan movement is growing because more
and more grocery stores have packaged
products on the store shelf it's not
true okay packaged products are not a
powerful indicator of interest or the
political vitality social relevance
meaning and impetus of the movement
these indicators show you what you
really need to know not the fact that
you can buy blocks of tofu at the
supermarket when 90% of the people
buying tofu or meat-eaters who have no
interest in animal rights all the vegan
foodstuffs are consumed by non vegans
it's the tragedy of being in Taiwan
right now in Taiwan right now vegan
restaurants are everywhere
vegan packaged products are everywhere
and the vegan movement is nowhere so
let's pay attention pay attention to the
successes and the failures Paul Bashir
is one of the
single most successful people and vegan
activism in the last five years but look
at his YouTube channel and he's not even
half as successful as I am and I defined
myself not as a measure of success but
as a measure of failure so let's get
real here's the YouTube channel for the
save movement the save movement is
probably the most respected and the most
positively covered in the mainstream
press of all these examples they get you
know magazines and newspapers writing
about them look at the YouTube channel
okay I can get more views than that if I
just upload another video complaining
that young people are lazy and should
quit playing video games these numbers
are practically zero and these are again
professionally edited well-made videos
sometimes with dozens of participants
but sometimes with hundreds and hundreds
of participants each one of those
participants has grandparents boyfriends
girlfriends cousins that will inflate
the numbers here's an actress you've
never heard of called Roger Yates all
right Roger Yates the number of views on
his videos as he he does tabeling as a
form of activism he sets up a table with
buttons and posters and booklets and he
just promotes veganism directly in a
humble way he collects donations that he
spends those donations you know doing
this form of activism the number of
viewers on his YouTube channel is
comparable to the number of viewers you
just saw for the save movement so if a
massively successful vegan organization
well you know with a huge level of
positive you know promotion in the
mainstream media in the press if that is
attracting a similar level of social
media interest to a tiny nobody you've
never heard of who just does tabling in
in Ireland this is a really serious
warning it's a red flag it's a canary in
the coal mine okay how about the single
most successful vegan organization of
the last decade PCRM at first glance you
might think the numbers aren't too bad
Hey
eighty-eight thousand views per month
the numbers are terrible my own channel
a complete failure eighty-three thousand
views I am just one guy flat broke you
know
no positive connections in the vegan
movement nobody's helping me fighting an
uphill struggle divorced single-parent
unemployed in a terrible situation
struggling to teach myself Chinese in
Taiwan at every disadvantage apparently
I can compete with PCRM you know what I
can compete and I can win that's how
much of a goddamn failure PCRM is or
conversely that's how little interest
there is in their success again these
are successful examples but the movement
as a whole is failing do not confuse the
success of packaged food products with
the success of the movement the movement
is still a failure okay it's getting
repetitive right I could keep going all
day we're not running out of examples
but how about a counter example
earthling ed is a single most successful
guy in the past couple of years that I
know of eight hundred thousand views per
month
Joie carb strong 282,000 these four
month if you take a moment and look at
the little of the little charts there on
the left-hand side of the screen you can
see they're not really growing I mean
they're they're kind of treading water
not rapid growth you know in the last
few months but still overall successful
overall debt so that's a counter example
right seems like a positive case study
bad news guys freely in August of 2016
12 point 3 million views what has she
declined to now by mid-2009 teen under 1
million views it's not just her failure
as one creative artist when you're
talking about 12 million people
disappearing from this category it shows
that the whole ecosystem is getting
smaller the total size of the audience
the total level of general public
interest is declining dramatically vegan
gains a dramatic decline from 5.3
million to 1.2 million views so my point
here is yes you can find a small number
of channels that are successful or
treading
but their success is on a tiny scale
compared to the failures like freely and
vegan gains and I can go on and on and
on I make a huge list we could go
through the whole list of everyone who
was successful in 2016 and these
declines are dramatic so if anything
what this indicates to me is that the
statistic we started with from Google
Corporation the trending data showing a
50% decrease from a peek into that early
2017 we're now at 50% the level of
interest that looks like a conservative
estimate some of these things indicate
that instead there's there's only
one-fifth as much interest or less that
actually the level of public under
system decimated and guys this whole
ecosystem this whole economy is hanging
by a thread vegan gains has the same
number of patrons as I do vegan gains
relies on a hundred and fifty eight
patreon supporters it's mind-blowing I
have only a hundred and forty two but
Wow I guess I'm not doing so badly bite
size vegan big name in the game three
hundred and nine supporters so if I
managed to double the number of people
supporting my channel I would be in the
big leagues with bite size vegan right
this is showing how small the big
leagues really are those annoying vegans
relying on only 39 supporters Joey carbs
strong very successful again he's one of
the few exceptions to the rule only 584
these are small small numbers but the
smallest numbers of all are reserved for
the people who are the most respectable
the people with PhDs so if you think
that YouTube channels that offer a
combination of activism and
entertainment are not indicative of
what's really going on in the
marketplace of ideas guess what the
YouTube channels that are just about
activism with no entertainment at all
they're doing much much worse here's
Gary Francie on a Francie on a redefined
the game in many ways his name is
synonymous with abolitionism the
abolitionist approach to begin activism
his YouTube channel
basically as
viewers but even on videos with a huge
number of people collaborating with a
huge level of institutional support
funding like this legal symposium which
is doubtless in many ways the
culmination of his life's work he's a
professor of law as well as a vegan
activist okay he is getting basically
zero views zero public interest on that
and you can compare suits that's in a
year a year ago that was uploaded that
video okay not yet 100 views by contrast
within one day I upload a video with no
links to anything of me just complaining
that people ought to quit playing video
games and they should read books and do
political activism instead and I get
vastly more refuse than that okay I got
no special effects I got no cut no
script
I got no plot I got no interns I have
absolutely no support from any vegan
organization anywhere in the world and
guys this failure on social media it is
reflected when you see the number of
people who show up for protests on the
street I recently made videos that were
controversial but enlightening for many
people where I really looked at how few
people were turning up for major events
promoted by all the big organizations in
Ottawa Canada before preparing this
video I looked at how few people show up
for vegan protests vegan political
events in Washington DC USA I didn't
want this video to be an hour long so
we're leaving that out but yes there is
a dynamic relationship between the level
of interest what Google measures in
these statistics and then what you can
do with organizing that interest to go
in and accomplish things in terms of
lobbying activism events in the real
world I mean really people like to
disrespect my truth but the fact is that
you know my name is
I'm going to end this with the
depressing reflection on what I would do
if I had more patreon support when I
lived in Vancouver I wish I had the
support whether it's in cooperation with
other vegan organizations or support
from viewers here then I could have gone
out and run a pancake stand or a hotdog
stand or a soup kitchen could have had
something like a vegan free food
foundation I wish we could have taken
that to really impoverished parts of
Canada and filmed it where you set up
you know a soup kitchen in effect giving
away free vegan food do it on First
Nations reservations do it in you know
dead-end post-industrial towns like
Hamilton Ontario go out there and tell
people and show people you have a choice
even if you're poor you can buy lentils
instead of beef you can improve your
health you can take ecologic allah tea
you can do the right thing ethically by
the animals go out and do a soup kitchen
giving away free food veganism I wish I
had the support to do that instead my
experience when I was in Canada Western
Canada was so negative that I decided I
had to give up on vegan activism
entirely I had the money at that time I
had a very small inheritance of my
father I ended up spending all the money
from my inheritance going to visit my
daughter because again I'm divorced to
the kid but I had a small inherits my
father and it said to other vegan
activist look let's do a conference at a
specific topic in mind let's get seven
people together each present a paper on
this topic then bind the chapters
together and publish it as a book I
would have done some more academic
things like that - the number one thing
I would do right right now if I had the
level of support and again I know these
people don't have that much more than me
if I had the level of support of bite
size vegan I would have an illustrator
complete the illustrations for my series
of children's books
I would get involved with writing
children's storybooks to support the
future of veganism and adapting those
storybooks into cartoons the cartoons
could be here on YouTube that could be
your on Netflix we have to get involved
with cultural production to produce a
new culture that is going to replace a
culture of excuses a culture of cruelty
a culture of ethical and environmental
irresponsibility that has become
normal that it's completely invisible
the ultimate tragedy of what veganism
aspired to do in the last five years try
to do and fail to do is that we tried to
shake this culture out of its sense of
unquestioning conformity to those social
and cultural norms and instead we have
ourselves become yet another invisible
part of those social and cultural norms
vegan options on airplanes have become
normal vegan packaged food in the
grocery store has become normal the
vegan diet be promoted on Oprah and NBC
and mainstream television has become
normal we've become part of the easily
ignored drumbeat of everyday life the
same way that people with peanut
allergies and people who are lactose
intolerant did we don't want to just be
a genre of restaurant we don't want to
just be another fad diet the point is to
form a movement a movement that's going
to make everyone else in this society
uncomfortable and it's ultimately going
to lobby for legal change I guess I kind
of realized in a way that even if I can
inform you know a thousand people and
maybe make some people just like me in
the process that it's worth it to me
[Music]